and welcome back to a fresh episode of
the business growth show I'm your host
Sam Dunning co-owner over at
webchoiceuk.com and if you haven't yet
check out my weekly emails where I'm
sharing actual B2B website marketing
tips useful podcasts goodies and more
keep your week off with a bang give it a
shot over at business growth dot email
so join me today I've got James Church
James is author of the Amazon
best-selling book investable
entrepreneur and he's also co-founder
over at robot mascot James welcome to
the show hey yeah good good thanks for
having me
no problem man so we're gonna be talking
exactly how you can raise investment for
your company with 2023 on the horizon at
the time of recording it's probably
going to be something on a lot of um
businesses Minds especially ones that
perhaps reached a certain point of
growth or maybe they need some cash to
get to the next level and it's a fresh
topic for the show so looking forward to
diving in sir so as always let's not
beat around the bush first and foremost
James
why why would a company why should a
company be looking in to be seeking
investment
yeah well the truth is not every company
should
um there needs to be there needs to be
the right type of company you need to
have big Ambitions you need to be
wanting to grow kind of a multi-million
pound
Enterprise you you have Ambitions to
kind of Take On The World you want to
you want to build a massive Legacy a big
business with with a huge
um
with a huge amount of Revenue and and
and potential so so what we're not
looking at with with you know most
investors aren't looking at investing in
kind of a small lifestyle business with
a team of sort of five to ten people
um that you're going to work out for the
for the rest of your um career and
perhaps sell when you retire if you're
that type of business
um there's other places to go for
finance so we're talking high growth
High scale wanting to to build something
you know in the in the tens of millions
of Revenue is is kind of the type of
business that would wouldn't and perhaps
should be seeking investment and and the
reason they might seek investment is is
because
reinvesting profits into your business
for growth is going to take a very long
time to reach those those goals so you
need additional Capital
um to to invest in products and
marketing to get the business off the
ground uh quickly and start start
getting Market Market traction and
reinvesting your profits is is probably
not going to get you the products you
need perhaps your product's really
expensive to develop in the first place
before you can even start to build uh
get some customers so yeah that's the
type of business we're we're thinking
about today
got it okay so we're talking not that's
not not real small businesses not
lifestyle businesses businesses are
perhaps looking to raise tens millions
of capital to yeah hundreds of thousands
to millions of capital but but their
ambition like five years time they want
to see themselves as a multi-million
pound Enterprise over 10 million Revenue
usually in the hundreds of millions of
Revenue um is there is there a true
ambition and and they want to be you
know a a big substantial business 50
plus employees that's that's what I what
I would call a performance business you
know not as opposed to a lifestyle
business
got it and that before we get actionable
before we walk through kind of how you
can go through the whole process of
thinking about and gaining investment
are there any other types of businesses
that you often see that try to get
investment that you feel probably aren't
ready for it are there any situations
where businesses just shouldn't go for
just aren't ready for investment yet
yeah so I think
um obviously the more you can the more
investors love something they call
traction and validation so they they
love to see progress being made they
love you know they love you to have a a
very early version of your product into
the market with some with some very
early revenues perhaps or perhaps just
users on a free platform that you've
created but but some kind of level of
Engagement from from the audience that
if you're in that position it's much
easier to raise investment than if
you're not that being said we work with
plenty of clients who who have a big
ambitious project a very complex piece
of technology that they're building or
product that they're building and they
just have very
um they have a great concept really
detailed wireframes or prototype and no
customers
um and and they can equally raise raise
investment we're slightly tougher than
if you've already got some customers and
and you've got some proof points
yeah I was going to say does that depend
on the sector or Market that you're in
whether you need existing customers
existing revenue or you just perhaps
have a a brilliant idea something that's
unique I mean are there rules against
this or is it it's not really wrong but
there is
you know certain sectors like
um fintech for example Financial
technology is a massive space right now
loads of money floating around and
there's probably it's probably easier to
raise Finance in in that sector and
perhaps an earlier earlier stage so we
had a client that was seeking
about 300K investment on and they have
some wireframe prototypes and they
wanted to to build
um build out that product they not only
cured the 300K but they managed to
secure 700k for that for that project
um so they massively over funded um so
in those types of hot hot areas it's
probably
um easier
um but uh yeah there's no kind of hard
and fast rule
um but but the just the more evidence
a good one to think about is kind of
medical technology like that's very
complex and you're you're gonna have to
do years of clinical trials before you
can even start generating revenue from
it so you wouldn't be expected to be
Revenue generating if you've got
something in medical technology or a new
medical device or product or something
like that so yeah it does depend
slightly but but yeah
yeah I know that makes sense I mean it's
the same same with a lot of things right
there's there's often variables and
things that are dependent so yeah that
makes sense so if uh if a company's got
to a certain stage and they have they've
got these growth Targets in mind so they
want in the next five years they want to
get to x million they want to get to X
head count and they've got serious
growth calls what are the first things
that they should actually consider
before they go out and start reaching
out to investors putting together a plan
yeah so you have to be yeah you have to
be prepared for for quite intense
investor scrutiny because they are
investors are getting hundreds of pitch
decks a week into their inbox and you
need to you need to make sure you shine
like one percent of of businesses end up
securing investment from like Angel
Investors and vegetables all combined so
you to be in that few percent that
actually go on to successfully close
around you need to be beyond beyond kind
of prepared and you need to be at the
very the very top of your game so you
you need to be extremely prepared you
mentioned in your introduction about
2023 and kind of looking forward into
into kind of what's Happening next year
we've seen with with everything that's
happening in The Wider economy
um there's more money being invested
than a few years ago as a result of
what's happening in the in the economy
right now which we can go into but but
what in terms of what investors are
looking for versus kind of 18 months ago
they're they're much more focused on due
diligence they're spending much more
time and energy and effort making sure
they're making the right decision on the
deal so you as a family needs to be more
prepared than ever
um in in terms of going out for
investment so you've got to have a a
compelling pitch deck that's going to
going to engage the investor get them
interested and want to spend time with
you exploring this in more detail then
you're going to need a really solid set
of financial projections that map out
the future Financial opportunity and
then that all needs to be backed up with
a really credible kind of business case
and business strategy of how you're
actually going to to build the business
in the short and the long term so how
are you going to spend their money right
now to get to the next strategic
Milestone and massively increase the
valuation of the company but beyond that
how are you going to get it from from
where it is now to to a point where it
can exit for hundreds of millions of of
dollars um so you need to have all of
that in place to to make sure that an
investor really sees the potential not
just in the business and the idea but in
you as a founder and being able to
actually execute on that because we can
all have great ideas right um but not
everyone can build a multi-million
dollar business out of it
oh yeah uh probably 10 20 ideas most
days I'm sure most of them are useless
um but that's part of the fun but yeah
but the best Founders can execute on
those ideas and turn them into a highly
valuable and Commercial
operation
um and that that's what they're looking
for is a great idea with a great founder
um they need those two things okay so
you mentioned a few points there pitch
deck Financial projections business
strategy and then considering a an exit
um
if you're up for it I quite often like
to give scenarios
so
let's say you mentioned fintech's quite
a hot industry Now Let's Pretend We're
talking about uh fintech company perhaps
they've they've got a brand new concept
that's not seen before and maybe like
you mentioned there they're building
some kind of uh SAS fintech Solution
that's got some kind of unique
proposition on the market and the the
founders strongly believe that in the
next five years it's gonna gonna break
through they're gonna be 50 100 staff
plus and they can kind of start turning
over in the millions so they've got this
this great solution for their fintech
offering
what do they need to do in this case to
actually is the first thing that they
need to do now they've got this concept
and build out the pitch deck is that
like one of the first things that's
probably the last thing actually that
you would do okay
assuming you've got a certain level of
validation and traction to to prove
firstly to yourself that this is worth
your time and effort pursuing
um you've got some early evidence
whether that be surveys focus groups
um industry experts kind of validating
that this is a concept that that could
work and could could fly ideally
contract signed with potential customers
or or a waiting list or actual users on
something you've built as an early
prototype but you've got some level of
evidence that suggests this is a goer
um once you've got that in place and and
you're pretty confident you know it's
beyond kind of a sketch on the back and
packet or an idea of you know it's
it's it's it's kind of got some legs and
you've done some initial research to
suggest it's worth pursuing the first
thing you would need to do is build your
business case out build out your
strategy because it's the strategy that
allows you to really think about the the
Strategic stepping stones of the
business over the longer term and it's
that document that would inform your
financial projections and this and
therefore inform your pitch deck as well
um so without that in place you can't
really build a credible set of assets so
it's it's strange when you when you
build out these assets I talk about you
start with the business plan then you
would build out the financial model and
then you'd create the pitch the order in
which you can present them to the
investor is you pitch first they're
interested in Pitch so they look at the
financial model if they like the
financial model they'll go into the
detail of the of the business plan so
you kind of create them in reverse order
to which the investor would see them
because they will have to tell the same
story and the pitch deck is basically a
summary of the other two documents and
the financial projections is built upon
the assumptions in the business strategy
so to make sure they all connect and all
stand up to investor scrutiny you have
to build them in that order so it's
business plan financial projections
pitch materials 100 always results in
the in the best the best outcome for the
pitch
and the best outcomes
so in terms of this strategy or business
plan are there any key elements that
must go into this
yes yes so quite a few but but a top
level there'd be
what have you achieved today you know
what have you what have you done so far
with the capsule you've invested either
yourself or or through early investors
or lack of cats all you've had so far
like what have you been able to achieve
with this with this conception you want
to talk about progress
um we'll want to talk about the
either the market opportunity so so the
the problem you see in the market and
and the the size and the scale that
market could be
um how big a markets share could you
potentially get in that market based on
all external factors like the
competition and the current economy and
and and
um legal factors that might might give
you an advantage looking at the at the
potential risks in the market but also
the potential opportunities so so
everything around the kind of Market
opportunity and Market potential
um your implementation strategy so now
we Now understand all of this stuff how
are we going to get from where we are
now to where we want to be in in the
future so that should be split into
short and long term kind of thinking
um exit multiples and research around
kind of what kind of exits do we get in
this industry you know different
Industries have different multiples so
if you're a if you're a
subscription-based tech business you
might be able to sell your company for
20 times its profit
um in your sector whereas if you're a
consultancy with no recurring revenues
and and just kind of contracts you might
be able to do three or five times
Revenue uh sorry profit
three to five times profit so you want
to research what kind of exit multiples
you could get and so investors are clear
that you're building a business that's
going to deliver the best kind of
potential multiples and the best type of
returns
um so all of those kinds of things are
in that in that strategy so we're
thinking about plotting our route to a
potential exit because that's how the
investors get their money back if they
they don't you don't exit the company
they don't make their money back or they
don't make a return on that investment
okay so that's what we're trying to
Showcase here is is
thought beyond the idea and I'm looking
to this is how I'm going to build a
highly scalable business
um
so I can get how
if you've got a product and you've
brought it to Market and you've got
customers you can kind of work out to
extern at a certain extent what the
opportunity is and then if you scale it
by X then you can work out perhaps in 10
years you might be able to exit for y
but if you've got a concept like in our
fintech example where you've perhaps not
sold anything yet but maybe you've
worked out there is a gap in the market
and you've got maybe you've got
projections I.E on how what age I don't
know each user let's say it's a SAS
platform each user is going to be
costing how many you think you can on
board but
most of this is still
I don't want to say guesswork but it's
still um
being thought up how do you how do you
put together these kind of numbers yeah
so when it comes to that when it comes
to the forecasts and and look at it it's
a real tough one for Founders because
Founders do feel like they have to be
able to predict their future right like
they're they are looking into a crystal
ball and they need to be able to see
what's happening in five years time and
the truth is that most most startups and
early stage don't really know what's
happening in their business in the next
couple of months let alone the next five
years yeah um so I like to think of it
as you're never trying to predict your
future not when you're raising these
kind of early stage rounds of investment
you're not trying to predict your future
you're trying to create your future so
you're leveraging as much research and
Industry insight as you can bearing in
mind that most Founders are building a
business in a sector that they have
quite a lot of Industry experience in so
they understand the customer really well
they understand the market really well
they understand who else is is offering
products maybe quite different to theirs
but solving similar problems in a
different way and what things are people
are willing to pay for for the solution
so you can use all of these kind of
insights both researching third-party
um data your own insights and instincts
um that of your advisors or of Industry
leaders and experts that have
interviewed through the validation
process to kind of build up a picture of
what you think would be reasonable and
realistic once you get to Market and
then you can start to cross-reference
that with
perhaps some businesses in a similar
Niche or with a similar type of business
model that have scaled at a certain rate
and you can kind of compare that to you
and plot out your your success and then
when quizzed by an investor you've got
all that research and that and that
backing up of those of those assumptions
in your business plan and that's why the
business plan is so important to say I
haven't just got a model and I've thrown
in an arbitrary 30 a month growth rate
and we're going to charge 100 pounds a
month for our subscription this is the
research that's led me to believe that
that's won the right price point and two
the kind of growth rate that could be
achievable because company x y and z
achieved that only last year
when they were when they raised 500k for
their concept they were able to reach a
hundred thousand users within 18 months
or whatever and and we could do
something similar it's it's possible
it's been done before there's no reason
we can do it so it's kind of drawing
parallels as much as you can and backing
up those assumptions with with evidence
and research and being reasonable really
yeah yeah I like that example if you can
cross-reference a company that's perhaps
in a similar sector that's done
something like that yeah and so when
when you're raising the first few rounds
of investment the the one thing you and
investors can agree on is that the
financial forecasts are completely made
up right and and you have no idea what's
going to happen but what they're what
they're looking for is that you're
financially literate that you understand
what you're trying to build that you're
moving towards this objective of getting
the company into this position because
if we get it into this position it's
going to be highly valuable highly
Equitable we're all going to get a great
return so what you're kind of saying to
an investor is look if you invest in me
I might end up going down a slightly
different path and we might take a
slightly different route but the end
destination is the same I'm going to do
everything I can to get the business
into this position in five years time so
we can walk away with an exit we might
end up with a different type of Revenue
Model A different a completely different
product and a completely different Niche
who knows where this journey is going to
take us
but everything I do is going to be with
a view to building a business that is
like this so you're kind of saying to an
investor I'm hell-bent on building this
performance business I talked about
earlier you're not going to end up
investing in someone who wants a
lifestyle business you're getting on the
same page you're showing an investor
your ambition and that your direction of
travel
do you think that investors
are more influenced by the person
themself or the I.E the founders or the
offer
the founders that's why my books called
investable entrepreneur not investable
idea or investable business
um
the entrepreneur is the one that drives
this the entrepreneur is the person that
sets the direction and sees the
information and makes informed decisions
on which way to progress so we can all
have great ideas as I said earlier but
only the very best can execute on those
and turn them into highly scalable
highly profitable businesses and they're
the ones who can roll with the punches
they can adapt as they as they learn
more about the market more about what
works more about what doesn't work and
they can find a way to success and
investors of an early stage concept are
very aware that the thing that they end
up exiting the business they end up
exiting is probably going to be a
million miles away from the one
originally pitched to them so what
they're really looking for is The
credibility of the entrepreneur the the
skill set of the entrepreneur the
financial literacy of the entrepreneur
to say you make a good strategic bet
because that's all they're doing they're
betting on a horse essentially and
they're looking at all these Founders
and they're saying which one's the best
strategic bet which one am I most
comfortable having access to my Capital
to deploy it and turn it into something
of greater value and if you can convince
them that that's you and you're going to
be the best person to the best custodian
of their cash then they're going to back
you and and very few investors really
care about the idea it's more about the
the way you're going to implement that
the way you're going to commercialize it
the way you're going to create value
from it that's the bit that they're most
excited by
yeah yeah yeah I like it
so we have gone through some of the
steps we've talked about kind of the
strategy and business plan I think we
talked about the financials a bit was
there anything I've missed I don't think
so we've got a good summary on those I
think
and then the pitch deck itself
what should what needs to be included
here
um so so the pitch deck's a summary of
of the other things we mentioned a
summary of the business strategy a
summary of the of the financials um and
it does two jobs
um the first job is to convince the
investor that it's a brilliant Concept
in a scalable Market or a large Market
with a brilliant opportunity is
something that the market wants it's
something the market needs it's kind of
it's a it's it's a great idea it's a
great concept it's a great business
the other job is to say this is an
incredible founder who can take this
idea to Market scale it up and execute
on it so I've got like a five-step kind
of
um uh method of kind of the stages in
which you need to take the investor
through
from start to finish and the first is
like the hook like get the investor
excited by the concept the idea the
vision
then it's the essence what's the value
proposition who is this for and how is
it going to benefit them and what's the
what's the problem it's solving
um then it's the the um evidence and the
uh is the third step and you need to
convince an investor that this is that
you have the research to back up this
concept it's something the market wants
it's something the market needs that the
market perhaps even adopting this
currently and you're seeing growth but
you have evidence to suggest this is
worth pursuing they're all the bits that
sell those first three steps selling the
concepts to the investor that this is a
great business Concept in a good Market
with scalable credentials the final two
parts of the pitch are the plan and the
ask now the plan is where you summarize
your business strategy how are you going
to take this to Market what's your
growth plans what's your product
development roadmap look like all of the
kind of slightly more technical details
around how you're going to actually
build and scale the business and that
gives them faith that you as an
individual as someone who's worth
investing into someone who's worth
investing their time in finding out more
more about this business that you've got
the credentials of actually being able
to build a scalable inextable business
and then the final bit is the ask which
is where we actually ask for the money
this is how much money we want this is
the valuation we're raising at
um and then
um these are the financial projections
for our business if we if we receive
this cash on these terms this is where
we could be in five years time and those
last two parts of the bit that says not
only is this someone with a great idea
but this is an incredible founder that I
can trust with my Capital but the thing
the thing you're doing with your pitch
is you're never ever pitching for
investment ever you never picture
investment what you're doing is you're
pitching for time
you're pitching for the investor to say
I think you're a brilliant founder and
this is a brilliant concept and I want
to spend my time in second and third
meetings with you better understanding
this opportunity and whether or not it's
going to create success for me and
whether I want to be part of this
Venture so you always pitch for time
um you never picture investment and it's
just getting a summary across to create
a conversation
and then you can explore all the detail
and show how clever you are in the
second and third meetings but the pitch
is the top level summary it's the
trailer whereas the business plan the
projections of the full movie
got it I like the summary so we'll talk
about pitching for time in a sec and we
also need to discuss kind of how you can
actually find an approach
um potential investors because that was
my fault for missing out but we'll we'll
cover that in a sec because that's going
to be important but what you just ran
through there that five steps for your
pitch deck it almost reminds me of a
great landing page or home page which is
my background in websites because start
with a great hook I mean if someone
lands on your site and doesn't quickly
know what you do or how you can help
them with a problem you fix then what's
the point they're probably going to go
to another page or another competitor
that does and likewise talking about the
problems you fix as step two number
three evidence and research why the
market needs us well that could be a
bunch of things like proof that you've
in in my case proofs that you've helped
other customers social testimonials
video reviews case studies
um and then plan strategy how you're
going to actually deliver on what you
say you can and then the ask the call to
action it's no surprise that my AI
background is in marketing and
advertising and brand and I've
used those skills to get really good at
helping people raise investment so I I
approach this
game of raising investment of convincing
investors exactly like you would with
the sales and marketing a landing page
or a sales and marketing campaign which
is why there's such a crossover and
you've identified that is because the
the thing that
I think makes the approach and the
things I talk about in my book kind of
resonate with with a lot of people is
and and delivers us the types of results
we get for our clients is because we
approach this from an angle of
communication and we treat it as if your
Shares are a product you're trying to
sell and the customer is the investor
and the pitch the business plan the
financial forecasts they're all
communication materials to make an
investor buy your shares or persuade an
investor to buy your shares so that's
what's given us great success because we
don't come from a VC background saying
oh this is the information I want we're
saying this is how you create
communication that's going to convince
an investor that your business is the
one to back and I'm glad you picked up
on the on the fact that it's I'm
basically rehashing classic marketing
techniques and and talking about it in
the terms of how to pitch to an investor
to get them to buy your shares it's it's
it's very closely related because that's
that's my background yeah yeah I like it
so pick itching for time tell us more
about what that means James and also be
interested and I'm sure the audience
would too as in how many of these
meetings do we typically have to set up
is it like one and two done deal done or
is it like five ten meetings or what was
the type of cycle look like yeah so
SO pitching the time the investment
process is quite a long one it can be
sort of they typically if you were to
Google this you'd probably get results
saying three to six months I think the
reality certainly at the moment is more
um six to nine months sometimes 12
months from from a first pitch to cash
in the bank it can take quite some time
so so when I everyone expects
everyone from sort of who's never done
this before probably has Dragon's Den in
their head or shark attacks depending on
where you are in the world and you're
going to rock up there's going to be
someone with a stack of cash on the
table and you're going to pitch and
they're going to go yeah I'm in
um and you're going to walk away with
the deal
um it doesn't work like that that's made
for TV um and most of those deals that
you see on TV end up failing when it
goes through to the due diligence phases
and all the legal phases required in
closing a deal very few actually end up
going ahead and you don't see that bit
so so what actually happens is you pitch
to an investor and that might be a
formal pitch with a presentation or it
might be a conversation in a coffee shop
but you're gonna explain your concept to
an investor and get their interest
that's the initial pitch you're pitching
for their time you're saying to them
this is a great concept I'm a great
founder
I'd love it if you were to commit some
time to finding out more
um and finding out more about this
opportunity that's that's what you're
trying to achieve your objective of that
first pitch is to get them to agree to a
second meeting where you can send them
your financial forecast send them your
business plan and start to talk things
through more detail
after that second meeting there'll
probably be a third and a fourth meeting
and and they'll start they'll continue
to converse with you they'll continue to
analyze your figures and your strategy
they'll do their own due diligence
around this Market potential and the
size of the market and the risks
involved in your sector and if after I
know you know there's an opportunity for
them to drop out at any point along this
journey but if you get all the way
through their kind of process of doing
due diligence and the conversations
you will then be in a position where
they will commit to investing a certain
amount of money in your business which
may be the whole round that you're
you're looking for let's say we're
raising 500k they might commit all 500k
or they might say I'm investing 100K you
now need to go find four other investors
that will also invest 100K um to make up
the round so you might have to go
through that process multiple times with
multiple investors to get all the money
that you're looking for so when I say
pitching for time it's literally that
you're pitching for them to want to book
a second meeting more of their time that
they will invest in you so they'll
invest their time in you first and then
they'll invest your invest their money
yeah well it's it sounds like what great
sales people do really rather than
getting hit straight away they're
gauging interest with their Outreach
whether that's a cold pool a DM or video
message
they're asking if it's you can start to
really see how this is nothing different
to any sales and marketing campaign and
as soon as you start thinking that
shares is selling a product to a
potential
um customer which is the investor it all
starts to make sense yeah yeah it's
nothing like nothing different than
everything you do every day in your
business right now awesome Okay so yeah
I was going to ask because you mentioned
the first meeting is just purely gaining
interest and then booking some time for
the second second meeting if they're if
they do do show interest and do Buy on
the idea and then you're kind of slowly
moving it on over time
should you
get several investors on the table where
to start with I mean perhaps we should
take a step back and before I ask kind
of how many investors should you kind of
approach like what should be
what is a good from your experience
James prospecting strategy and when I
say that actually making a list of these
are I don't know 10 20 30 40 50
potential investors yes
what's the list building strategy yeah
and what's the what's the Outreach
recommended strategy yeah
excuse me so there'd be no surprise to
to you to to learn that reaching out to
investors is no different to any other
sales or marketing campaigns so you need
to create a funnel you need to create a
funnel that will go from from you know
prospects down to clients and investors
that commit and and as a general rule
and this will change for every business
but as a general rule based on kind of
looking at averages of of campaigns that
we've been involved with for every one
investor that you have on your
um ending up investing in your business
you might need to reach out to sort of
30 to 50 investors so so it's like I've
created like 30 10 to 1 rule is the
general kind of rule for the funnel so
for every 30 investors you reach out to
10 might show interest and and you get
that initial pitch meeting with
um two uh would then express some levels
of interest and want to go through the
due diligence process with you in those
second and third meetings and then one
of those will end up investing so 30 10
2 1. so if you're thinking I've got a
500K round
and I'm going to need five investors
committing 100K each
um you're going to need to multiply that
by five so so your Thirty investors
becomes 150 that you reach out to is an
absolute minimum
um to try and work them through that
funnel and the better you are at it the
better your numbers and the the more the
the less good you are at it the bigger
that funnel needs to be at the top so it
wouldn't be unusual for us to work with
clients and Outreach to at least 500
investors
um if not a thousand potential investors
and and then work them through through
that funnel
um just to be on the safe side because
what you really want to be is over
subscribed you want to be like any
business any product yourself you're
more likely to sell it if if demand
outstrips Supply if you've got more
people wanting to buy your product if
you've got queues of people around the
block wanting to um buy your new product
then it's then then you're going to be
the one of the most profitable companies
in your in your sector and the same
again is true with investment so you
want to get yourself in a position where
you can make these these types of phone
calls at the end of the process and you
can ring up these investors that have
said they want to invest and say look
I've got some good news and I've got
some bad news good news is we've got
enough investors on board that we can
close our round the bad news is some
investors are going to have to miss out
because we've actually got more interest
than we need we're not going to over
fund we only want to close the 500k
we've actually got 1 million committed
so half of the investors that want to
invest aren't going to be able to invest
in this round you're one of my top pick
investors I love what you could bring to
the table Beyond money I love that you
were connected to X Y and Z I'd love for
you to be part of our journey if you're
still on board I need you to know let me
know by the end of the week so I can add
you to our heads of terms and instruct
our legal team to send out the paperwork
if you if you're no longer interested
it's absolutely fine don't worry about
it I've got loads of people waiting so
suddenly you're flipping the tables on
the investor and and they're having this
kind of fear of missing out crap if I
don't if I don't make a decision now I'm
going to miss out on something that
could be the next big thing all these
other investors are so interested in it
I really need to I really need to sort
of um make this happen where I'm going
to miss out on on a potentially huge
deal
um so so ideally you want to be in that
position so if you can reach out to as
many as humanly possible you're more
likely to be in that position than
scraping around desperately trying to
find that one investor that will that
will give you the money you need yeah
yeah I mean it's just like sales and
business right having a healthy pipeline
is a cure of one of these business
issues yeah that's it that's it for sure
so
I don't have the first clue on this how
would you go about actually finding
people that want to invest like is there
like a database is it a case of scraping
LinkedIn or there is okay do that
there's a database you can you can
scrape LinkedIn
um so you can do LinkedIn searches you
can get LinkedIn Pro or sales Navigator
or whatever and you can start searching
um for investors in your local area or
investors that might be connected with
certain industries
um so but there's a lot of people who
wouldn't necessarily put investor in
their profile on LinkedIn um and they
kind of their CFO or CEO or founder of
other companies and there they've got
some wealth and they they use that cash
to to invest in in startups
um so they might not be known on
LinkedIn so so the best probably one of
the best sources is a website called
crunchbase and this is like a database
of of investment activity and and as a
you'd have to be a premium member to
export the data
um but you can bet for free you can do
searches
um
for investors so you can look at recent
investment deals in your sector and you
can look at which companies have
recently raised investment in your in
your Niche and then you can click on
their profile and you can see who
invested in that round and then you can
add them to your list you can search for
there's an investor search so you can
literally just say who I want names of
investors that have invested in this
Niche at this level of funding and it
will give you a list you can look at
competitors you could perhaps have a
list of competitors in your nation you
could look at all of their profiles and
see who their early investors were so
they might be
five years older than you but someone
invested in them at the beginning who
were those people and are they still
active so you can look at those and my
personal favorite is you can look at
recent acquisitions and mergers in your
in your Niche on crunchbase so you can
look at who's recently sold their
business in my Niche and you can contact
their investors and you can contact the
founder themselves you can say you know
these people have literally just made a
ton of money from your sector by
investing in a company just like yours
why wouldn't they want to go again with
something that's even like the Next
Generation the the next big thing in
that Niche they've just made a load of
money from it and they've just had a big
payday so they've got cash to invest
right now and most Founders when they
exit a business what's the first thing
they do start investing in the next crop
of Founders because they don't know what
to do with these tens of millions of
dollars that have just landed in their
bank account so they start Angel
Investing so you can use all of those
tactics on crunchbase to build a list of
potential investors in your in your
Niche
um got it okay and no that's that's
helpful in terms of building that list
and I'm sure crunchbase like you said
and perhaps LinkedIn and a few other
questions there's grit.io is another one
there's quite a few out there um that
you can use
awesome and then in terms of just like
sales there's tons of ways you can
Prospect Right video message called cool
cold email LinkedIn message the list
goes on but what have you found to be
the most effective yeah so there's a few
different approaches the first is Good
Old Linkedin connection but don't try
and pitch in that LinkedIn connection
just just connect with them probably say
nothing
um and then just start engaging with
their content and posting your own
insightful content about the progress of
your business and start to just build a
relationship most Angel Investors want
to want to kind of feel like they know
like and Trust the founder that they're
investing in so the chances of them
engaging with you if you do a LinkedIn
connection saying I'm looking to raise
investment this is my sector here's a
link to my pitch deck do you want to
connect then more than likely going to
say no so if you just connect with them
and just take it slow and build up a
relationship and then and then start to
start to reach out to them that that can
work really well obviously there's the
classic kind of LinkedIn prospecting
type approaches there's there's codes
um there's cold Outreach but in terms of
email but the best way to do that is
with some kind of element of
personalization so
um doing some social listening maybe
checking out their their um profile and
seeing what they've recently posted or
tweeted about and kind of referencing
that in the in the intro so you're
making it very very obvious that they've
been personally targeted because you
believe that they have an interest in
your in your sector and your Niche
um what else introduction so if you can
leverage your current Network to get
introductions to anyone on that list
that's by far the best way investors
will always have time for an
introduction and more than a cold
Outreach so yeah they're the kind of the
top ones really I think um there's loads
more we could talk about but I'm just
conscious of boring your audience and
taking up too much time no no problem at
all um let's let's wrap it up though I
think we've gone through the full cycle
pretty much but what I do want to cover
is negotiation in because I'm sure that
that comes up I investors want more
stake than you're willing to give
for maybe less cash and you're on more
cash than you're willing to part with so
let's to wrap things up let's talk about
finals how to deal with tough
negotiations and how to close deals up
yeah it's really difficult right so
investors will always disagree with
whatever valuation you put in your in
your pitch
um just in the same way that if you were
putting a house on the market
you probably you're you you're expecting
offers below that asking price
um and there's going to be some kind of
negotiation in in between so so people
are going to try and get themselves a
deal and you have to be prepared to to
negotiate the the when when investors
look at your valuation what they're
really doing is weighing up risk versus
reward and they need to they will do
through their due diligence uh and their
research once they've decided to invest
time in exploring this opportunity
they'll come to a conclusion on what
they believe your valuation needs to be
for them to get the types of returns
that they would need to get from the
capital they invest in you
in order for them to want to commit to
investing that time in figuring all of
that out they need to know that you're
within a kind of a negotiation tolerance
within an area that's worth their while
so let's say for example you've got a
business and you're valuing it at 20
million and the investor thinks you're
worth six million there's absolutely no
way of bridging that Gap that's a too
big a gap you might be able to convince
them to invest at 8 million maybe even
10 but they're never going to get to 20.
so they are looking for you to have a
valuation in your pitch that suggests to
them that you're within the right
tolerance for them to invest the time
and start figuring this out and then
it's just a case of doing everything you
can to back up
you're the valuation that you've put
versus the valuation they want and
coming to some kind of agreement in the
middle because they're always going to
go with the lowest you're always going
to go with the highest that's reasonable
and you're going to have to find
somewhere in the middle that you're
comfortable with now as a general rule
of thumb for your for your audience who
might be thinking about this if we were
to look at a billion dollars worth of
deals done in the UK over the last um I
think it's over the last five years or
so
the average Equity that is sold for a
pre-seed seed and Seed round so
typically your first three rounds of
investment you might have in a business
is 15 each time okay 15 on each round
and that gives you a rough ballpark of
kind of what based on how much you want
to raise and how you if you're willing
to sell the average at 15 that will give
you an idea of what a sensible valuation
might be obviously if you're raising too
much for the stage of development you
are so maybe you're trying to raise 20
million when you've only just had an
idea then that's going to skew the the
valuation but providing you're raising a
reasonable amount given the stage of
development you can kind of use that as
a general rule of thumb to figure out
your your indicative evaluation
um evaluation there's lots of different
valuation methods we can use we use five
different valuation methods for our
clients and put together a full
independent report but as a back of a
packet kind of calculation on
roughly what I should put in my pitch
deck that's a really good starting point
because that's hard to argue against
really that's the average that's that's
a sensible ballpark
yeah no that that was that is all
helpful now in terms of the negotiation
side of things I mean there's a sales
term I think it's called batner like
best alternative to negotiation
something I forgotten what the last part
is but is that something that
businesses people seeking investment
should have in their mind I.E we're
we're not willing this is something you
should prepare beforehand because like
you said investors probably could get
pretty firm on numbers
um and they might come to a point where
they're not willing to shift to Beyond a
certain point but should you as as a
person as a business seeking investment
kind of work out all these numbers
beforehand I this is the lowest we're
willing to go to let's set up everything
beforehand so we're not going in and
Fanning around or panicking last minute
and then yeah you want to be prepared
and you want to think to yourself what
what a best case outcome and a worst
case outcome and what your red lines are
and what you just can't do the deal on
because you don't want to be pushed too
much from the investor to give too much
Equity too soon because that could be
disastrous for you and them actually at
a later point because if you if you give
too much Equity away too soon that
leaves you little wiggle room to go and
raise future rounds of investment that
you might need to achieve the type of
growth that you're looking for
and if you end up in a position where
you've sold too much of the company
and you don't feel like you're getting
you're going to end up with enough of a
return for all the time and the effort
and the Blood Sweat and Tears you've put
in then you're probably going to kind of
just let the business kind of fizzle out
and maybe start up a new thing with a
new idea because you're entrepreneurial
and you're always coming up with these
ideas so it's not in the Investor's
interest to be overly zealous on the on
the negotiation because if you're not if
you're not emotionally bought into this
because you don't feel like you're
getting a fair cut of the returns for
the effort you're putting in then you're
just not gonna Focus or you're just
gonna ditch it you're going to start
something new so there is a there is a
risk on their part for pushing it too
far and you can perhaps use that with
slightly more than perhaps newer and
more naive
um uh investors you can kind of use that
as a bit of Leverage to say look for me
to be committed to this based on our
future plans we can't go beyond this in
terms of equity because after we've
raised two or three more rounds
we're going to be diluted so much it's
not going to be worth our while so we
need to think about the future Journey
that we've mapped out in our business
plan and therefore we can't afford to
sell more than this today and that's our
that's our red line
um so yeah it's having all the ducks in
a row and
yeah being fair
um but also firm in terms of what works
best for you and your future and if
you're in that position where I said
where you're over subscribed that puts
you in a much because if they don't
agree that valuation you've got others
that will and if you can follow on on
these terms or you're out
um if you're in that position it makes
life much easier definitely yeah that's
the best place to be James with that
said sir thank you very much for coming
on the show appreciate you sharing your
wisdom on all things yeah
no worries at all appreciate it so with
that said please do tell us more about
how everyone tuning in can learn more
about yourself your company and any way
you want to see our audience yes I think
the best thing for for them to do if if
you're listening and you're thinking I
might be looking at raising investment
in 2023 and I need to make sure I've got
my ducks in the row and I need to make
sure I'm prepared enough
um go to pitchready.co.uk
um that's a free
um quiz that will give you a sort of
takes about three minutes to complete
you'll get uh you'll get a 12-page
tailored report on how investor ready
you are along with tips and tricks on
what you need to do to improve your your
investment Readiness and you can also
claim a free copy of my book having
taken that quiz as well you'll get sent
a link to get a free copy of of my book
as well so that's probably the best way
to start kind of absorbing knowledge and
understanding how to play this game and
how to how to go out and raise
Investments so yeah I'd encourage
everyone to go and do that awesome and
we'll put a link to that in the show
notes over at
businessgrowth.marketing and was that
thanks once again James
thanks for having me no worries and as
always if you enjoyed Today's show a
quick rating or review on your audio
podcast goes a long way off on YouTube
subscribers much appreciated and with
that we'll catch you on the next one for
more actionable no BS tips to grow your
business and grow Revenue cheers for
tuning in